THE BLOOD WAS STILL IN HER HAIR. It was on her neck, her hands, her clothes, her shoes, which were mostly stained by the puddle that reached her feet. It didn’t bother her as much as it should have, rather it was just a pain to think about. The stickiness of it made her want to crawl out of her own skin and scrub it off. Bothered. Was she? Was she bothered by the fact that the man had died and she was alive? Was she bothered by the fact that guilt was plaguing her mind because she simply took too long to make one decision? She didn’t know what she was feeling. If anything, she was tired, exhausted, sad, angry– the list could go on.

“Are we going to talk about it?”

She almost forgot she wasn’t alone in the jeep. She almost forgot that Stiles had somehow overheard that whole entire conversation. Almost. “Talk about what?” Was she trying to feign innocence? The effort wasn’t even there. Her voice was just plain.

Stiles let out an audible breath. “You know what.” His voice was low and hoarse. He sounded tired as well. 

The moment after they had all been recovered, it was hectic. The group had gone up to rejoin the rest of civilization, relieved and happy to be alive. Olivia didn’t even remember the moment when Stiles pulled her off to the side apart from the rest of them just before the exit. He just said, ‘I’ll take you home.’ and then led her to his jeep. All she did was nod because there was just so much happening inside of her brain that it was a hassle to simply think. He just held her hand. He probably didn't know, but that small gesture made her feel safe and comforted. When his hand left, her hand grew cold. Outside of the school, it was raining, raining hard. Like the heavens were battling above them and decided to rain hell down below, literally. 

Olivia didn’t know if any of her friends had seen her face and body splattered with blood, most of them just regaining their own eye sight that was probably still blurry. She was fortunate that none of them saw, actually relieved that Stiles had pulled her away from them and was helping her. Maybe he knew that she didn’t want to be seen like this– like a down right mess that is. 

Few words were spoken between them just, ‘are you buckled?’, ‘yes’ and then silence. Olivia could tell Stiles was josseled as much as she was, but she didn’t know why. I mean, she could come up with a few reasons, but he was still tense around her, sorrowful if that. He didn't even glance at her once throughout the entire drive to the house. Just the sound of the rain hitting the windshield as if its sole purpose was to break it and flood the car. Olivia did once. Her gaze caught sight of his fingers and how they were slightly trembling. 

She looked away. 

But now they were parked outside of her house and sitting, unmoving. 

“Thanks for the ride.” Was that all she could say, seriously? Not ‘thanks for saving my life.’ or ‘thanks for being there for me.’ She was pathetic. 

Opening the door, she stepped outside and was immediately thrown into the process of being drenched. The water ran down her face, covered her blood soaked hands and washed away the stainful red that maybe did bother her slightly. Shutting the door, she saw a glimpse of Stiles looking down at the floor of the jeep, thinking deeply about something.

The rain continued to wash away the blood and she had never been more thankful for such weather before. She wanted to stay outside, lay in the road and let it drown her until she was fully submerged. Then maybe all the blood would be gone from her hair, legs, neck, and hands. Maybe she would be clean. 
 
Five steps, seven steps–

“Wait!”

Olivia stopped in the middle of the road. Her body tensed for a moment. 

“I can’t just go home without talking about whatever happened.” His voice was barely heard over the rain, but she listened intently. 

Turning around to face him she was met with his features dripping with water just like hers. He was breathing heavily. “Olivia, you almost died.”

There it was. Her eyes shifted down the pavement as he continued talking, speaking about something she didn’t necessarily understand herself. So, how was she supposed to answer his question when she had one herself?

Stiles stepped closer to her, yet still a couple feet away. “You told me that you could fight, protect yourself, but you didn’t. I don’t understand what happened. One minute you were telling me you were fine and then the next you were,  fuck, I don’t even know.” His voice was low but loud. He looked as if he were still trying to figure out what he had seen. 

She bit the inside of her cheek, hard. “There's nothing to understand. I was just, just shocked, okay? I was being held at gunpoint and was frozen. Not necessarily unbelievable.” Olivia spoke loud as well, but eyes still trained on the road, unable to meet his eyes yet.

“Then why don’t I believe you?” 

She faltered. 

“Why don’t I believe that you couldn't fight, that you haven’t been held at gunpoint before? I remember once you told me that you were, by a man. You didn’t say anything else and I didn’t push you to, but if the feeling was familiar why wou— didn’t you move? We both know you know you had the skills to prevent it.” he stated it so firmly that Olivia didn’t know how to respond for a second, a long second. He was starting to figure her out when she didn’t even have herself figured out yet. It set an alarm off somewhere deep in her mind. 

He also started to say didn’t, but stopped himself. ‘Why wouldn’t you move out of the way?’ She could practically feel it on the tip of his tongue wanting to slip out and be spoken, to be answered.  

 “Stiles, I was shocked– scared. When you're put into such a position where every movement you make could seal your death, you don’t fucking move.” Now her hands were slightly beginning to tremble and she didn’t try to hide it or stop it. “Do you think I'm faster than a gun? If I would have moved or tried to unarm him, I would have been shot.” 

“You said you were on borrowed time.”

And that's what made Olivia’s eyes snap up to his, panic and some other feeling that she couldn’t describe coming over her immediately. He had heard. 

He didn’t wait for her to respond, it wasn’t even a question, it was a statement– a fact. 

Stiles remembered the moment when he decided to return. He had thought that splitting up wasn’t a good idea when he was already half way down to his destination, ready to drag Olivia with him. He thought to himself that splitting up never helps in horror movies, and this might as well be one at this point. So, he turned back with heaving breaths. He also remembered walking up to the door and seeing a sight that made him falter and his heart drop to his feet. 

The gun was what he saw first and then she came into his line of vision. The girl he cared so much about was being held at gunpoint and he didn’t know what to do. He didn’t know what the fuck to do. 

"Do you think you're scaring me right now? That I'm worried that my life will end at this moment? I've been on borrowed time for a while, and it just seems that I've run out."

He heard her voice, not weak, but strong through the door. Confusion washed over him. What? It was like that feeling back in Mexico. That feeling he had when Olivia was too reckless with the guards or too careless about her actions. Creeping suspicion crawled up his spine and sent a chill down himself. 

Stiles decided to do something. He refused to sit and watch his…best friend? For some reason that didn’t sit right with him, but he pushed that aside, be killed. It was like the fates sent him a gift, not one he particularly liked, but one he appreciated till the ends of the earth. Scotts fucking dad just happened to be running down the hallway right as he was about to get help. And guess what was in his hands: A weapon.

He waisted not even a moment of time as he scrambled back onto his feet and almost fell from his movements. He huffed and stumbled over his words, frantic out of his mind because if he were a moment too late…he didn’t dare put it into words. 

But, couldn’t she get herself out of this situation? She had been in worse as she had told him once before. That creeping suspicion somehow told him that it wasn’t a good idea to leave her alone on this. A terrible suspicion. 

“I turned back to come get you and what did I come back to see? A gun being pointed at your freaking head! Liv, you didn’t move, you didn’t want to move. I could see it from where I stood on the other side of the door.” His voice sounded pained now, angry, but pained as his eyes were creased from worry. 

“You were on the…” fuck. What was she even doing? “What’re you suggesting here?” she wasn’t going to even try to deflect her actions. At this point dread was filling her head to toe.

The boy ran his hand through his wet hair. What was he asking? “I’m not suggesting anything. I think you already know. I– just help me understand what happened, ‘cause I’m going to go absolutely crazy if I don’t get an answer.”

“Honestly?” she sighed shakily, feeling her vision become glassy. “I can’t explain to you what I don't know myself. It’s true I was shocked in that moment, but I was doing what I thought was right–”

“And what you thought was right was letting yourself be shot in the head?”

“No, that's not–”  

Stiles cut her off, “I care about you, Olivia. I care about what happens to you and for fuck’s sake, I care about whether or not you live or die, get that through your head.” He had taken many strides forward, now an arms length away from her. “I won’t talk about what was going to happen if I hadn’t gotten Scott’s dad, but don’t pull that shit again. You don’t know how that affects other people, the people that actually give a shit about you! Some people don’t want to lose you…that can’t lose you.” his voice had trailed down to a somewhat quiet tone at the end and his face was serious, completely and utterly serious as he spoke. 

“I thought I was protecting everyone– you. I didn't mean to hurt anyone, that's not what I wanted…” she muttered under her breath like she was trying to figure out where she went wrong.

“Then what did you want, huh?” He was frustrated as well. His voice had begun to become louder, straying from the previous calm one. 

“I don’t know! Maybe peace, is that too much to ask? Was it a moment of weakness? Perhaps I was tired of always being in between life and death and wanted to choose a side just this once. I didn’t mean to hurt you. I was selfish and I’m sorry!” she was breathing unevenly now and tears were streaming down her face. When did the tears start falling from her eyes? Was it noticeable? Could he see them through the rain? She didn’t like feeling or looking vulnerable. 

His chest was falling up and down quickly, lips pressed into a thin line. “Fuck it, if you get to be selfish, so do I.”

 Faster than time seemed to move, Stiles had marched right up to her and instantly took her face in his hands, lips covering hers. It was sloppy, hands against her face as his mouth was pressed so hard onto hers Olivia could hardly breathe. Her eyes shut as soon as she processed what was happening, her hands traveling to his neck and finding his wet hair, her fingers getting lost within. It only grew to be more intense when Stiles found Olivia to be kissing back just as fervidly as he was. 

She didn’t know she could crave a taste she’d never had before. 

Olivia had never felt more alive than she did at this moment. The moment where she was being held by him as tightly as possible, closer to him than ever before.

She hadn’t known that he felt the same as her. When did he start to develop feelings? Was she oblivious or just plain stupid?

Unfortunately, she was starting to lose breath and needed air. Against her wants, Liv pulled away, yet their foreheads still touched as they leaned into one another. The rain was still pounding around them, but that didn’t matter. 

They both stood in each other's hold and didn’t move– they didn’t want to move. His hands were so warm in contrast to the cold water dripping continuously down her face. It felt as if time was suspended around them, as if the world had stopped moving just for this small instant.  

Hesitating to look up, Olivia decided to just stare at his shoes, possibly…embarrassed to look him straight in the eye? But, that didn’t last long due to Stiles tilting her chin up and his eyes finding hers. 

“You can’t leave me, not when I care so much about you.” he whispered. 

The eye contact was held, held so deeply it was like a trance that they were both stuck in. This time, Stiles leaned in and it was a more soft, tender kiss in comparison to the rough and lustful one before. His lips hovered slightly over hers and then left. 

Meanwhile, Olivia Flynn was abso-fucking-lutely frozen. All she could do was continue staring at him like he stole the moon from the sky and placed it in her hands. What did this mean for them? Were they supposed to just act normal next time they see each other?

“Why is it that you care so much about me?” Olivia spoke for the first time, overcoming her shock. 

He smiled. Stiles smiled for the first time since they had started arguing. “Because you’re you.”
“That’s not an answer.”

“For me it is.” His smile was one of the most beautiful things that Olivia had ever seen, something that could easily brighten up her darkest days. 

“What do you want this to be?” she didn’t know what compelled her to ask the question, but she knew if she didn’t it would eat her inside-out. 

Stiles didn’t hesitate. “More.”

Her chest tightened in the best way possible. We’re her cheeks flushed? She didn’t doubt it. 

“But,” she tensed, “Promise me, Liv, that you’ll never do that dumb shit ever again.” 

It wasn’t even a hard decision, not one she had to think about anyway. Whatever happened earlier had impacted him so much to push him to do such a thing like this– Olivia nodded, “Promise.”

They stood in the same position for as long as they could, until the rain stopped, until the sun showed. She didn’t want to leave this safe space, once he stepped away, they would have to talk about this– and she didn’t know how to talk about…this. But, the time had to pass anyway, he had to leave to go back home to his worried father at some point. His hands fell from their spot in her cheeks and he looked at her one last time.

Before he turned to leave, “Oh, Stiles.”

He stopped and waited. 

“Thank you for saving my life.”

A very faint smile spread across his lips. “You don’t need to say thanks.”

-

My god, Olivia was frazzled to the highest degree. What was she doing right now? Staring at her bedroom wall in her soaking wet clothing.  How was she doing? Not well. At first she walked into the house in a trance, taking off her shoes, closing the door and locking it, and then going upstairs to where she currently is sitting. Staring at her wall with her jaw slack. She could still feel the ghost of his lips over hers, his hands cupped around her face– and now her heart rate was picking up again.  

She felt like a middle school girl fawning over a guy holding her hand for the first time, but for her, she was kissed and it was her first real kiss. Everytime she thought about it, she got even more flustered than before. 

The moment they are in a five foot radius of on another, all she’ll think about is his lips on hers, how close they–

Stop. 

She wouldn’t be able to function if she continued to think like that. But, Olivia couldn’t help but contemplate what it meant. A whole bunch of questions fell upon her once she thought about that. Did he like her–  like, like, like her or was she just stupid? Normally when you kiss someone that… passionately it means you at least like them to a degree at least, so just what was she thinking? 

What was she supposed to do? Go on and be normal? That was definitely not happening. 

Ding!

Olivia didn’t even move to grab her phone, simply stuck in a frozen form staring at her wall. 
Ding!

The second sound was enough to grab her attention. Olivia snatched the phone and her first thought was: Stiles. Unfortunately, it was not him, but Lydia checking up on her. 

The entire rest of her day was spent staring at her wall and not moving, only replaying the occurrence from earlier. Little did she know that he was doing the exact same thing, except with the addition of banging his head against his wall and trying to go to bed when clearly his mind was occupied with…something else. 


–

See, the thing about being involved with the supernatural on a daily basis, is that you never get a day off. Yesterday, Olivia and her friends were almost killed due to an assassin catching wind of them in their literal SAT test class and now Scott had dragged them into yet another scheme of his. Olivia had slept a full thirteen hours last night, she wasn’t sure how, she just woke up at one pm because Scott had smacked her with a pillow saying he thought she was a corpse. It wasn’t too hard to believe that her body needed one hell of a rest after what she went through the previous day on top of her little…encounter with Stiles right after. 

What had really caught her off guard was the fact that the first person she saw when coming down stairs was the boy himself, his back facing her stationary figure on the steps. 

“Hey,” Scott, who was speaking with him who shall not be named, had found her completely rigid on the steps. “Oli–” but his sentence trailed off as he blinked and she was gone from the spot she had been stuck on, vanishing into thin air. Confused, Scott blinked a few times, wondering if he was just seeing things, and then went back to Stiles. What was even more confusing was the sight he returned to. Stiles was smiling into his fist.

“Dude, what?” he asked.

Stiles snapped out of what he was doing subconsciously. “What, oh. Just thinking of something.” he said, then tried his very best to focus on what his best friend was talking about. 

Meanwhile, upstairs Olivia was a heaving mess. She slammed her door shut and had her back plastered to it like the FBI was about to kick it down and she was a wanted fugitive. She didn’t expect for him to have this much of an impact on her. Originally, she just thought she would be extremely nervous around him or even uncomfortable, but not to the degree of hiding from his sight and avoiding his presence. 

Suddenly, she was very aware of the fact that she had just woken up. Her hair was a tangled mess, breathe was gross, and wearing only a sweatshirt that covered her shorts so it kinda made her look like she had no pants on. 

In a flash, Olivia tackled her breath first, scrubbing the living daylights out of her own teeth. Then, roughly brushed her hair that wasn’t even that knotty to begin with, and then looked at herself once more.
